Right
Daily Mail
New House Speaker Mike Johnson says it's 'very likely' Joe Biden committed impeachable offenses and says 'we're going to follow the truth wherever it leads' in inquiry
https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-12687291/Speaker-Mike-Johnson-Biden-impeachment.html
New Republican Speaker of the House Mike Johnson says that it's 'very likely' President Joe Biden has committed impeachable offenses as the House GOP's inquiry continues.
Johnson, a virtual unknown conservative from Louisiana elected earlier this week, now takes responsibility for the inquiry started under previous speaker Kevin McCarthy.
Republicans have charged Biden and his family made millions off shell companies Hunter Biden formed when his father was vice president. Hunter had business deals with an energy company in the Ukraine, received a discounted stake in a private-equity firm in China, and did consulting for a Romanian real-estate magnate.
Speaking to Sean Hannity on Fox News, Johnson believes that they're going about the inquiry the right way but that eventually, it will lead them to a charge against the president.
'The reason we shifted to the impeachment inquiry stage on the president himself was because if, in fact, all the evidence leads to where we believe it will, that's very likely impeachable offenses,' Johnson said.
New Republican Speaker of the House Mike Johnson says that it's 'very likely' President Joe Biden has committed impeachable offenses as the House GOP's inquiry continues
Johnson said he owes it to what he sees as the Republicans' brand as being tough on crime at any level to keep the investigation moving. 
'That's listed as a cause for impeachment in the constitution; bribery and other crimes and misdemeanors,' he added. Bribery's listed there, and it looks and smells a lot like that. We're going to follow the truth wherever it leads. We're going to engage in due process because, again, we're the rule of law party.' 
The Louisiana Congressman took a shot at the Democrats' multiple impeachments of Trump in saying that the GOP will do things the right way.  
'I know people are getting anxious and they're getting restless and they just want somebody to be impeached, but we don't do that like the other team. We have to base it on the evidence,' added Johnson. 
Republican House Rep Matt Gaetz has told Newsweek he believes Johnson can conduct the impeachment inquiry much more effectively than McCarthy, whose running of it he described as 'failure theater.' 
Gaetz said Johnson will 'approach this like a lawyer' and not, like McCarthy, 'a desperate person trying to cling to power,' according to Newsweek. 
The president has denied any involvement in his son's business dealings. But Republicans claim at least a dozen Biden family members could be involved in a scheme to benefit financially from Biden's public office. 
House investigators are expected to issue subpoenas for the bank records of the president and his family. The GOP also claim Biden sat in on at least 24 calls with Hunter's business partners and was referred to as 'the big guy' by Hunter's business associates. And they say Joe Biden used pseudonyms to discuss his activities related to Ukraine with his son Hunter during his time as vice president.
Republicans have charged Biden and his family made millions off shell companies Hunter Biden formed when his father was vice president
Speaker Kevin McCarthy, facing heavy pressure from the right wing of the Republican Party, will launch an impeachment inquiry into President Joe Biden
An inquiry is the first step in the impeachment process. It is when evidence is gathered for the articles, or charges, of impeachment against an official.
It is a massive step with many pitfalls, including infuriating Republican moderates and many GOP senators, who are skeptical of the issue and causing friction with the White House as budget negotiations are underway. Congress faces a September 30th deadline to fund the government or it will shutdown.
McCarthy, however, is under intense pressure from the conservative wing of his party to make such a move, including threats from some of his own GOP lawmakers to remove him from the speakership.
The White House has repeatedly denied Biden has conducted any wrongdoing. The president himself has said he was not involved with any of Hunter's business deals. 
Some of Hunter's former associates, however, have testified that Joe Biden spoke to Hunter's business associates but the president's defenders say it was quick conversation and merely cordial, not related to any dealmaking. 
Joe Biden also used various private email addresses from which he would sometimes send, receive and forward government correspondence according to emails found on Hunter Biden's now-infamous laptop.
'Robin Ware,' 'Robert L. Peters' and 'JRB ware' were three pseudonyms used on emails that were about both official and family business.
The White House argues it's common for public figures to use false names. 
McCarthy charged Biden was involved.
'Eye witnesses have testified that the President joined on multiple phone calls, and had multiple interactions, dinners, resulted in cars and millions of dollars into his son’s and his son's business partners,' he said. 
It's estimated Hunter raked in $40 million through 20 shell companies and fake accounts created while Joe Biden was vice president, at the same time the elder Biden was joining Hunter's business calls and stopping by at lavish dinners.
The White House called McCarthy's move 'extreme politics.'
'House Republicans have been investigating the President for 9 months, and they've turned up no evidence of wrongdoing. His own Republican members have said so. He vowed to hold a vote to open impeachment, now he flip flopped because he doesn't have support. This is extreme politics at its worst,' White House spokesperson for oversight and investigations Ian Sams said in a statement. 
President Joe Biden has denied any involvement with Hunter Biden's business dealings - above the two men on the Truman balcony with Hunter's son Beau on July 4th
The speaker justified his decision, claiming Biden's family got special treatment from the government. 
'It appears that the president's family has been offered special treatment by Biden’s own administration - treatment that not otherwise would have received if they were not related to the President,' he noted.
He did not specify how the Bidens got special treatment but House Republicans have demanded records from the Justice, State, and Treasury Departments as part of their probe. Hunter is under investigation by a special counsel and faced an IRS investigation about his taxes.
Hunter Biden has denied any wrong doing. 
House Republicans have been investigating the president and his family since they took control of the lower chamber in January.
Republican Rep. James Comer, chairman of the Oversight Committee, claims there could be upwards of 12 Biden family members who benefitted from influence peddling by the president and Hunter.
While most names have not yet been revealed, Comer previously said that suspicious activity reports (SARs) reviewed by Republicans on the panel have found that President Biden's brother Jim Biden and his son Beau's widow Hallie Biden benefited from foreign business deals.
Comer accused Hallie Biden of influence peddling by receiving a $35,000 payment linked to a Chinese firm.
The reports from earlier this year claimed that Hallie received a cut of the $3 million from China sent to an associate of Hunter Biden, whom she dated from 2016-2019 after her husband Beau died of brain cancer.
The White House, at the time, released a blistering statement accusing Republicans of orchestrating an 'attack' on Hallie.
Members of the Biden family could get dragged into the impeachment probe.
'We know that bank records show that nearly $20 million in payments were directed to the Biden family members and associates through various shale companies,' McCarthy said on Tuesday.
Comer alleged that President Joe Biden's brother James 'Jim' Biden was among those who benefitted or were involved in foreign influence peddling 
Republicans subpoenaed bank records and released documents purporting to show that Hallie Biden (right) received a cut of $3 million in cash from China
When House Republicans meet on Thursday behind closed doors in the Capitol, the two committee chairmen leading the probes of the Biden family - Reps. Jim Jordan of the Judiciary Committee and Comer - will lay out their findings thus far.
Jordan, Comer and Republican Rep. Jason Smith of the Ways and Means Committee will lead the probe. 
'I do not make this decision lightly,' McCarthy said Tuesday.
'I would encourage the President and his team to fully cooperate with this investigation,' he added. 'We are committed to getting the answers for the American public. Nothing more, nothing less. We will go wherever the evidence takes us.'
Three separate Republican-led committees have investigated allegations that Hunter Biden leveraged his father's vice presidency to secure foreign business deals that made the family a mint.