Right
New York Post
House Speaker Mike Johnson says Biden likely committed impeachable offenses
https://nypost.com/2023/10/30/news/house-speaker-mike-johnson-says-very-likely-biden-committed-impeachable-offenses/
Newly elected House Speaker Mike Johnson believes it is “very likely” that President Biden committed impeachable offenses and has vowed to “follow the truth wherever it leads.”
The Republican from Louisiana told Fox News’ Sean Hannity that he’ll continue the probe into whether the Biden family benefited financially from connections with other countries while he was vice president.
“The reason we shifted to the impeachment inquiry stage on the president himself was because if, in fact, all the evidence leads where we believe it will, that’s very likely impeachment,” Johnson said.
He noted that bribery is listed as a cause of impeachment in the Constitution, saying, “Bribery’s listed there, and it looks and smells a lot like that.”
“We’re going to follow the truth wherever it leads,” Johnson vowed. “We’re going to engage in due process because, again, we’re the rule-of-law party.”
“I know people are getting anxious and they’re getting restless, and they just want somebody to be impeached, but we don’t do that like the other team,” he said, taking a swipe at Democrats who tried to impeach former President Donald Trump.
“We have to base it on the evidence.”
The interview came as House Oversight Committee Chairman James Comer (R-Ky.) demanded Biden clarify why he got a $200,000 check from his brother on the same day James Biden received an identical transfer from a US hospital company by promising to use his “political connections” to find a Middle Eastern investor.
Comer asked White House counsel Edward Siskel for details on what Biden allies say was a loan repayment between brothers after vowing to haul Biden’s relatives before his panel “very soon” to explain the president’s interactions with their associates from countries such as China and Ukraine.
“If Joe Biden did personally loan James Biden an amount that was later repaid by the $200,000 check, please provide the loan documents, including the loan payment, loan agreement, and any other supporting loan documentation,” Comer wrote to Siskel on Thursday.
The Oversight Committee chairman has publicly scoffed at the six-figure check being a loan repayment and wrote that there’s no evidence that Joe Biden ever loaned his brother that amount — after Rep. Jamie Raskin (D-Md.) said records show the loan occurred about two months before the March 1, 2018, check.
“The White House has claimed Joe Biden loaned James Biden $200,000, and this check was repayment,” Comer wrote to Siskel.
“Records obtained by the Committee do show numerous large incoming transactions into the personal account of James and Sara Biden from various entities. Some of these transaction records may have obscured the identity of the true payer, but no records in the Committee’s possession state that Joe Biden made a large loan payment to his brother.”
Comer also asked for “applicable documentation and IRS filings” that could show whether there was indeed a loan.
Prior to the request, Comer had also asked special counsel Robert Hur to divulge whether any classified documents improperly retained by President Biden following his vice presidency deal with countries where his son Hunter did business. 
Additionally, Comer asked Hur to detail the scope of his office’s two-day interview with the president and “any limitations or scoping restrictions during the interview that would have precluded a line of inquiry regarding evidence (emails, text messages, or witness statements) directly linking Joe Biden to troublesome foreign payments.”
The president has denied any involvement in his son’s and brother’s business dealings.