Left
The Guardian
US House vote fails to expel Republican George Santos after 23 federal charges
https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2023/nov/01/us-house-vote-republican-george-santos-expel-new-york
The lying representative from New York retained his seat with fewer than two-thirds of the chamber supporting the resolution
A vote to expel the Republican lawmaker George Santos from the US House of Representatives failed on Wednesday when fewer than two-thirds of the chamber supported the resolution, preserving Republicans’ narrow 221-212 majority.
Santos on Friday pleaded not guilty to a 23-count federal indictment accusing him of crimes including laundering funds to pay for his personal expenses, illegally receiving unemployment benefits and charging donors’ credit cards without their consent.
Santos, who represents a small slice of New York City and parts of its eastern suburbs, would have been just the sixth to be expelled from the House in US history. Three of the five congressmen were voted out for fighting against the US in the civil war.
Republican lawmakers from Santos’s state of New York said last month they would introduce a resolution to expel Santos, but the move was delayed by weeks when the House was leaderless following the removal of Kevin McCarthy as speaker.
Republicans on 25 October elected Mike Johnson, who has said he does not support expelling Santos for being charged with a crime, to succeed McCarthy.
Santos has been ensnared in controversy since shortly after winning his election in November, when he was accused of fabricating much of his biography on the campaign trail.
The corruption charges against Santos also include reporting a false $500,000 campaign loan and lying to the House about his assets.
A trial for Santos is scheduled for 9 September 2024, shortly before the elections that will determine control of the White House and both congressional chambers.
The House ethics committee has also said it is looking into allegations involving Santos. The investigative subcommittee contacted 40 witnesses, reviewed more than 170,000 pages of documents and authorized 37 subpoenas, the committee said.
The ethics panel said it would announce its next steps by 17 November.
Sign up to First Thing
Our US morning briefing breaks down the key stories of the day, telling you what’s happening and why it matters
after newsletter promotion
Also on Wednesday, the House in a bipartisan 222-186 vote defeated a resolution to censure congresswoman Rashida Tlaib after she spoke at a rally that called for a ceasefire in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Marjorie Taylor Greene, the Republican representative, introduced the resolution on 26 October, accusing Tlaib of “antisemitic activity, sympathizing with terrorist organizations, and leading an insurrection at the US Capitol Complex”.
Greene’s resolution refers to a peaceful demonstration in a House office building, during which hundreds of protesters were arrested. Tlaib did not participate in that demonstration.
Tlaib in a statement called the resolution “deeply Islamophobic”, adding: “I will continue to work for a just and lasting peace that upholds the human rights and dignity of all people, and ensures that no person, no child has to suffer or live in fear of violence.”