Right
Daily Mail
Fast-moving Highland Fire rips through Riverside County and spreads to 2,200 acres: More than 4,000 people evacuated and homes destroyed
https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-12694585/Highland-fire-riverside-country-spreads-california.html
A fast-moving wildfire which has ripped through Riverside County has spread to over 2,200 acres and is yet to be contained by firefighters. 
The seasonal Santa Ana winds began wreaking havoc as the 'Highland Fire' erupted across rural land in the southeast areas of Los Angeles at around 12.45pm on Monday.
More than 4,000 people have been forced to evacuate after the Riverside County wildfires put 1,300 homes at risk. 
The fire grew even more to 2,200 acres by Tuesday morning and zero percent has been contained, according to Cal Fire. No deaths or injuries have been reported so far. 
Roughly two miles of land has been affected by the devastation of the wildfires that have destroyed at least three buildings and damaged six more. 
A fast-moving wildfire which has ripped through Riverside County has spread to over 2,200 acres and is yet to be contained by firefighters
More than 4,000 people have been forced to evacuate after the Riverside County wildfires put 1,300 homes at risk
The fire grew even more to 2,200 acres by Tuesday morning and zero percent has been contained, according to Cal Fire. No deaths or injuries have been reported so far 
The seasonal Santa Ana winds began wreaking havoc as the 'Highland Fire' erupted across rural land in the southeast areas of Los Angeles at around 12.45pm on Monday 
The disaster saw 310 firefighters flock to the scene with three air tankers, three helicopters and three water tenders.
The Santa Ana winds - sometimes referred to as devil winds - are strong dry downslope winds that flare up inland and affect Southern California's coast around autumn time most years.
California caught its first glimpse this year of the Santa Ana winds over the past week - with strong winds ranging from 20 to 25 miles per hour. 
The affected area in Riverside County is sparsely populated and the fire initially sparked in the uninhabited dry, bushy hills of Aguanga.
Most houses in the small town of Aguanga sell for under $1 million - with more expensive houses going for around $800,000 and empty lots going for as little as $30,000 for three acres of land, according to Zillow.
'The problem here is not only the wind, but also very low relative humidity, which does not give good recovery times for fuels. So, the fuel is very dry and the humidity is extremely low and the wind is pushing it,' Cal Fire's Maggie Cline De La Rosa told KTLA.
Firefighters attack from the air with a fire retardant drop as they battle the Highland Fire
California resident Francis Lopez douses flames with a bucket of water as a wildfire called the Highland Fire burns through his property in Aguanga, California
The Santa Ana winds - sometimes referred to as devil winds - are strong dry downslope winds that flare up inland and affect Southern California's coast around autumn time most years 
Firefighters hold hose line while battling Southern California's most recent Highland Fire
The disaster saw 310 firefighters flock to the scene with three air tankers, three helicopters and three water tenders 
The winds were forecasted to slow overnight - which would give fire crews the opportunity to contain the blaze. 
Fire spokesperson Jeff LaRusso said: 'Wind trumps everything. Hopefully the forecast holds.'
Mindy Ellison, a lifelong Aguanga resident, said the high winds blew burning embers towards the hill near her home and started a blaze close to her. 
'That hill…has never burned as long as we’ve lived here,' she said. 'The two surrounding hills have, but that one, it’s the first time burning.'
A reception and care center has been set up at Great Oak High School for those who have been impacted by the fire. 
Firefighters attempting to douse the flames caused by the Highland wildfire 
A fire truck approaches as a structure which has been engulfed in flames 
The affected area in Riverside County is sparsely populated and the fire initially sparked in the uninhabited dry, bushy hills of Aguanga
The winds were forecasted to slow overnight - which would give fire crews the opportunity to contain the blaze
Mindy Ellison, a lifelong Aguanga resident, said the high winds blew burning embers towards the hill near her home and started a blaze close to her
Evacuation orders remain in place for residents south of Sage Road and Golden Eagle Drive, north of Cottonwood Creek, west of Boulder Vista and east of Becker Lane.
Residents south of Highway 371, west of Sorensen Road and north of the San Diego County line are also under the evacuation order. 
A spokesman for Cal Fire said the Highland fire is burning in light grasses and medium brush. 
Cameras in the area showed how billowing plumes of white smoke 
'We’ll have an increased augmentation of ground resources today.' he said. 
'They’ll be bolstered by numerous resources that will be working in the area, as well as our fixed-wing and helicopter assets that will be working over the fire throughout the day to try to build some containment on this.'
The Santa Ana winds have ignited some of the worst wildfires in California history - including the devastating Woolsey Fire in Malibu that started on November 8, 2018, and ripped through more than 220,000 acres.
Malibu's raging 2018 fires killed at least 50 people and reduced entire communities to ash.
The National Weather Service said Riverside County could see winds of 15 to 25 miles per hour through Tuesday with gusts as high as 40 miles per hour.
The weather service issued a red flag warning of extreme fire danger through Tuesday afternoon for parts of Los Angeles and Riverside counties.