Right
The Daily Wire
Dems Use Steamy Sex Ad To Attack Ohio GOP Changing State Law
https://www.dailywire.com/news/dems-use-steamy-sex-ad-to-attack-ohio-gop-changing-state-law
Democrats in Ohio released a steamy ad in which a couple is starting to have sex, but are interrupted by a supposed GOP congressman who magically appears and tells them they can’t use a condom.
The ad was produced by activists from the Progress Action Fund who want to block Ohio State Issue 1, backed by Republicans, which would “require that any proposed amendment to the Constitution of the State of Ohio receive the approval of at least 60 percent of eligible voters voting on the proposed amendment,” a change from the traditional simple majority needed for approval.
As the woman in the ad rolls on top of the man in bed, she asks him if he has a condom. When he reaches to his nightstand to grab one, an elderly man’s hand grabs it first, before the camera pans to the elderly man in a suit and tie pronouncing, “Sorry. You can’t use those.”
“What are you talking about? Who are you?” the woman, now covered with a blanket asks.
“I’m your Republican congressman,” the elderly man informs the couple. “Now that we’re in charge, we’re banning birth control.”
“This is our decision, not yours,” the woman protests. “Get out of our bedroom.”
“I won the last election,” the “congressman” informs her. “I’m not going anywhere. I’m just gonna watch and make sure you don’t do anything illegal.”
The ad then proclaims, “Keep Republicans out of your bedroom. Vote no on August 8.”
State Issue 1 would also: “Require that any initiative petition filed on or after January 1, 2024 with the Secretary of State proposing to amend the Constitution of the State of Ohio be signed by at least five percent of the electors of each county based on the total vote in the county for governor in the last preceding election,” and “Specify that additional signatures may not be added to an initiative petition proposing to amend the Constitution of the State of Ohio that is filed with the Secretary of State on or after January 1, 2024 proposing to amend the Constitution of the State of Ohio.”
If State Issue 1 passes, it would tie Ohio with Florida as the state with the highest voter approval requirement to pass citizen-initiated constitutional amendments.