Right
Daily Mail
Ohio sees huge turnout for vote to make it harder to amend state's constitution: Republicans say it will protect 'radical' changes to abortion and education laws
https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-12385073/Ohio-sees-huge-turnout-vote-make-harder-amend-states-constitution-Republicans-say-protect-radical-changes-abortion-education-laws.html
Ohio voters joined massive lines Tuesday to vote on a measure that would make it substantially harder to change the constitution to turn back a legislative push and enshrine abortion rights.
Many of the longest lines were in urban areas that tend to be Democratic strongholds, but due to a series of factors it was difficult to tell which side in the caustic debate the turnout could favor. 
The issue that has activists seething and ordinary voters brushing off scorching temperatures is an effort to raise the bar for changes to the state constitution – from a simple majority to a 60 per cent supermajority.
The vote isn't taking place in a vacuum. There is already a referendum set up for November on inserting abortion rights protections into the state Constitution, after the Republican-controlled legislature passed an abortion ban beginning about six weeks after conception. 
Voters surged to polling places to cast ballots in a highly charged special election. The measure on the ballot would make it harder to pass changes to the state's Constitution – in advance of an effort to enshrine abortion rights set for November
That effort came after the U.S. Supreme Court last year overturned Roe v. Wade, setting off a flurry of legislative activity in the states – with pronounced impacts on national politics. 
If Issue 1 passes on Tuesday, the amendment would need to get a 60 per cent supermajority to pass. If it goes down, the changes could pass on a simple majority. 
The number of advance ballots cast - a combination of mail and early in-person ballots - hit nearly 700,000, more than double the early vote during the state's two previous midterm primary elections in 2022 and 2018. 
As of Friday, 578,000 people had cast ballots, substantially more than that 288,700 people who voted early in last May's Senate and governor primary, the Columbus Dispatch reported. Last August, 143,000 people had voted early in primaries.
The measure would also make it harder to put future initiatives on the ballot. Advocates would need to get signatures from voters in all 88 of Ohio's counties, instead of 44 as it stands now. 
Driving the massive interest is the knowledge that the contest that could determine the fate of abortion rights in the state and fuel political playbooks nationally heading into 2024.
Voters lined up early last week to vote on Issue 1. The is set to be decided at the polls Tuesday
If passed, the measure would make it harder to enshrine abortion rights in the state's Constitution
A crowd cheers as Jim Caviezel speaks during a "rosary rally" on Sunday, Aug. 6, 2023, in Norwood, Ohio. A national religious organization, Catholics for Catholics, gathered a lineup of anti-abortion influencers
Rev. Dr. Mark Rich of Trinity Lutheran Church Downtown holds a "No on Issue 1" sign during a gathering of Columbus faith leaders speaking out against Issue 1 in a "Faith Votes No" rally at Washington Gladden Social Justice Park downtown
On the ballot is Issue 1, a proposal to raise the threshold for passing future changes to the state's constitution from a simple majority to 60%. But more passionately in the sights of the proposal's backers - including Republican officeholders - is a proposed constitutional amendment on the November ballot that calls for enshrining access to reproductive care in the state's foundational document.
The measure was clearly resonating with voters, who turned out in huge numbers during the early voting period, which ended Sunday.
Republicans pushing the measure say it would protect the state from 'radical' changes in abortion laws. Abortion rights supporters call it an effort to remove political power from the hands of voters.  
Ohio's August elections have historically focused on local issues and been plagued with chronically low turnout.
The Republican lawmakers who backed Issue 1 maintained that the measure was not about thwarting the fall abortion amendment, despite reinstating an August special election just like the ones they had only recently voted to eliminate.
Raising the bar for passing citizen-led constitutional amendments could make it difficult, if not impossible, for the fall proposal to succeed, based on polling figures. Voters in several states, even deeply conservative ones, have affirmed abortion rights since the U.S. Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade last year, though usually with less than 60% of the vote.
AP VoteCast polling last year found that 59% of Ohio voters say abortion should generally be legal.
Out-of-state money has poured into both sides of the contest over the 60% threshold, even as both supporters and opponents say one of their main goals is to keep special interests from having more influence over state policy than average Ohioans.
The campaign in favor of Issue 1, Protect Our Constitution, has told voters that raising the threshold will keep deep-pocketed interest groups from pushing redistricting, gun control and minimum wage policies on Ohio. One Person One Vote, the opposition campaign, argues that raising the threshold for passing future amendments would prioritize the interests of Ohio's increasingly conservative GOP supermajority at the statehouse over those of everyday voters.
But abortion rights are at the epicenter of the fight, as Ohio and other states have been given control of their own abortion policies following the Supreme Court overturning Roe v. Wade last summer. Ohio's ban on most abortions had been placed on hold under Roe and then allowed to take effect briefly after the court overturned it. Since then, it has been frozen again while a challenge alleging it violates the state constitution plays out.
The abortion amendment would give individuals the right to make their own reproductive health care decisions, including on contraception, fertility treatment, abortion and miscarriage care, until a fetus is viable outside the womb.
At the same time, a broad bipartisan coalition opposes Issue 1 for other reasons. Former Ohio governors and attorneys general of both parties have come out against the constitutional change, calling it poor public policy. If passed it would reverse 111 years of direct democracy that has the potential to affect future citizen-led ballot efforts.
Protect Women Ohio, the campaign against the fall abortion question, has spent millions on the August election - airing ads suggesting the measure not only codifies abortion, but could pressure children into receiving gender-affirming care and undercut parental rights.
Several legal experts have said there is no language in the amendment supporting the ads' claims, but it follows a pattern through this election cycle of misinformation and fear-mongering being used to sway voters.
Issue 1 opponents have aired ads and mobilized a large coalition, including voting rights, labor, faith and community groups, as well as the state Democratic Party.
It was because of chronically low turnout that lawmakers voted just last year to scrap summer elections, prompting an unsuccessful lawsuit alleging this year's August special election violated the new law and calling further into question if it was brought back solely to thwart abortion rights for Ohioans.