Center
NPR
Tuesday's vote on Issue 1 has implications for reproductive rights in Ohio
https://www.npr.org/2023/08/08/1192550481/ohio-issue-1-ballot-special-election-abortion-constitutional-amendment
Ohio residents line up to vote early in-person on Issue 1 in front of the Franklin County Board of Elections in Columbus, Ohio, on Thursday.
COLUMBUS, Ohio — Voters head to the polls Tuesday for a special election over Issue 1, a ballot measure which seeks to raise the threshold for voter approval of amendments to Ohio's constitution.
If passed, the measure would require 60% approval to pass future constitutional amendments, up from the current simple majority requirement that has been Ohio's standard since 1912.
Republican Secretary of State Frank LaRose, who proposed the measure, said it's about keeping wealthy out-of-state special interests out of Ohio's founding document.
"We're talking about amending the Constitution probably for the rest of our lifetimes," said LaRose. "That should be taken very seriously."
Opponents of the referendum suspect the timing is designed to thwart a constitutional amendment coming up on the November ballot — one that would enshrine the reproductive rights in the state constitution.
It all started when Ohio's six-week abortion ban went into effect last summer. Soon after, news went viral of a 10-year-old rape victim who had gone to Indiana for an abortion when Ohio doctors wouldn't treat her.
A lawsuit put that ban on hold, but groups mobilized to draft an amendment to Ohio's constitution guaranteeing abortion access, and started gathering signatures for a November ballot issue.
Republican supermajority lawmakers couldn't get their 60% voter approval idea onto the state's May primary ballot, so in February they came up with a new plan — an August special election.
There was just one problem: Republicans had voted to eliminate most August special elections in a law they passed in December. LaRose, who testified in support of that law, said it shouldn't be an issue.
"As a course of action, normal course of doing business, yes, I do not believe in having elections in August as a normal way of holding elections," he explained.
"But if the state legislature decides to hold an election in August, it's not unusual," said LaRose.
It is unusual, however — the last time a statewide special election was held in August was in 1926.