Left
Washington Post
Trump sons testify in New York civil fraud trial against family businessWhen Eric Trump testified Thursday in the $250 million lawsuit accusing him, his brother and their father of fraud, attorneys for New York’s attorney general repeatedly pressed him on the financial statements at the heart of the case.
Again and again, Trump insisted he had nothing to do with the documents, saying that his work with the company focused on construction projects and development deals. He stood by his recorded March 7 deposition, a portion of which was played in court Thursday.
“I’m not stuck in the office,” Trump said in the deposition clip. “I’m on the ground at various properties.”
Trump was preceded on the stand by his older brother, Donald Trump Jr., who similarly sought to distance himself from the financial documents.
New York Attorney General Letitia James (D) has accused the Trumps, their father and their eponymous company of inflating the financial statements to secure better terms. Trump Jr. testified Thursday morning that he was not involved in the accounting that went into the statements, describing that as the work of the company’s accountants.
During his testimony, Trump Jr. was presented with documents he had signed certifying the accuracy of the statements, records that came from a period between 2017 and 2021, when he was a trustee on his father’s trust. Trump Jr. took on that role when his father became president in 2017 and announced plans to hand over management responsibilities with the Trump Organization and have his assets in a trust managed by Trump Jr. and longtime finance chief Allen Weisselberg.
Trump Jr. said his decision to sign the documents boiled down to trusting the accountants’ work.
“If they assured me in their expert opinion that these things were fine I would have been fine with that and signed off accordingly,” Trump Jr. testified while being questioned by Colleen Faherty, a member of James’s trial team.
The testimony of the two eldest Trump sons came as the trial enters a new, more highly scrutinized phase, with members of the Trump family expected to face questioning multiple times.
In many ways, the Trump sons’ appearances this week served as a prologue to next week’s scheduled testimony from the former president, who is expected to take the stand Monday. Ivanka Trump was named as a defendant with her father and adult brothers but an appeals court dismissed her from the case in June. She is scheduled to testify next week. Trump and his sons are also expected to be called back to testify by their own attorneys.
James sued the Trumps, the Trump Organization and two of its longtime executives last year, alleging a decade-long fraud designed to score financial advantages in business deals. From 2011 go 2021, the lawsuit said, company executives purposely inflated the value of Trump’s net worth to save money in those deals.
James has argued the boosted wealth figures and certifications from Trump executives allowed the company to present itself as less of a financial risk and entitled them to better rates from banks and insurance firms.
Defense attorneys have said there was no fraud and that real estate valuations are subjective. They have also said there was nothing improper about the company’s valuation practices and that the lenders did not rely on the statements of net worth prepared by Trump accountants every year in their decision-making.
James’s lawsuit has seemingly struck a nerve with the senior Trump. While he is under no obligation to attend the proceedings, Donald Trump has shown up multiple times to sit through testimony and deliver extended remarks outside the courtroom excoriating the lawsuit, along with James and New York Supreme Court Justice Arthur F. Engoron, who is hearing the case.
Before the trial got underway, Engoron ruled that the defendants and the company broadly committed fraud. The case unfolding now, which will be decided by Engoron, will examine whether they committed specific illegal acts in the course of committing fraud, and determine possible penalties. Because it is a civil trial, not a criminal one, no one involved faces potential time behind bars.
Transformed Trump family will take center stage in New York courtroom
Trump, the leading candidate for the Republican presidential nomination next year, has repeatedly assailed Engoron, calling him a “wacko” on social media Thursday.
These remarks have not prompted any public pushback from Engoron thus far, but he has taken a harder line on Trump’s repeated comments about a member of the judge’s staff. When Trump posted online about this person and included a photograph, Engoron issued a limited gag order blocking Trump from publicly commenting on his staff. Engoron issued a $5,000 fine against Trump on Oct. 20 for violating the gag order and last week fined him $10,000 for a second violation of the order.
Near the end of the day Thursday, Engoron scolded Christopher Kise, a Trump defense lawyer, for referring to the same staff member that resulted in the initial gag order against Donald Trump while making an objection during Eric Trump’s testimony.
Kise made a sarcastic remark implying the judge would need a cue from the staff member to make a decision. Trump’s defense team has repeatedly complained about this staff member, suggesting that the person is biased. Engoron, though, admonished Kise, and noted that he could place Kise and the other defense lawyers under a gag order over the issue. Engoron ultimately did not impose a gag order.
The dust up over the member of Engoron’s staff capped off what was otherwise a day dominated by Trumps on the stand. Trump Jr. was up first, wrapping up his testimony that began Wednesday.
After his testimony ended, Eric Trump then testified that he did not know the company had maintained statements about their father’s net worth until James’s investigation.
Andrew Amer, another attorney from James’s team, responded by showing him documents from 2012 and 2013. Eric Trump acknowledged he knew the company had financial statements, but mostly didn’t commit to having known about the annual reports at issue in the lawsuit.
“We’re a major organization, a massive real estate organization, yes I’m fairly sure I understand … that we had financial statements. Absolutely,” Eric Trump said. At one point, he described company mailboxes flooded with documents, but said he did not focus on the statements that James’s lawsuit cited.
He is expected to continue testifying Friday.
Berman reported from Washington.