Right
Fox
House Republicans push to torpedo Biden's 'environmental justice' executive order
https://www.foxnews.com/politics/house-republicans-push-torpedo-bidens-environmental-justice-executive-order
Sen. John Kenney, left one Biden administration official without words Wednesday when he pressed him to answer one simple question: How much would spending $50 trillion in American taxpayer money to become carbon-neutral lower global temperatures?
Rep. August Pfluger, R-Texas, is leading a House GOP effort to rescind President Biden's executive order directing federal agencies to take a "whole-of-government approach to environmental justice." 
Pfluger, who is chairman of the House Energy Action Team, called the order an attempt to entrench environmental justice in the bureaucracy and introduced legislation Friday that would repeal it. 
"Instead of focusing on the many crises facing our nation, President Biden has delivered a mandate that every federal agency must focus on ‘environmental justice.’ This president is completely out of touch with the American people and the issues they are facing in their daily lives due to the policy failures of his administration," Pfluger told Fox News Digital. 
Biden's executive order, titled "Revitalizing Our Nation's Commitment to Environmental Justice for All," directed federal agencies to "address gaps in science and data to better understand and prevent the cumulative impacts of pollution on people’s health," according to the White House. It also created a new Office of Environmental Justice to coordinate environmental justice efforts through the administration. 
BIDEN EXECUTIVE ORDER TO REQUIRE AGENCIES TO MAKE ‘ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE’ PART OF MISSION
Rep. August Pfluger, R-Texas, has introduced legislation with 22 GOP co-sponsors that would repeal President Biden's executive order on "environmental justice." (Tom Williams/CQ-Roll Call, Inc via Getty Images)
The focus on "environmental justice" means "every federal agency must take into account environmental and health impacts on communities and the work to prevent those negative impacts," Biden said during a signing ceremony on April 21. 
The executive order also recognized that "racism is a fundamental driver of environmental injustice." It directs federal agencies to consider and prevent disproportionate impacts of environmental and health harms on poor and minority communities. It also requires agencies to consult with historically excluded communities and "actively facilitate meaningful public participating and just treatment of all people in agency decision-making." 
BIDEN ADMIN INADVERTENTLY PRAISES FOSSIL FUEL DRILLING BENEFITS
President Biden signs an executive order on new actions to advance environmental justice, in the Rose Garden of the White House in Washington, D.C., on April 21, 2023. (BRENDAN SMIALOWSKI/AFP via Getty Images)
Pfluger said these priorities were misguided and harmful.  
"Despite the nationwide education crisis caused by COVID-19 school closures, Biden’s Department of Education is using its resources to force climate change propaganda on children. The Department of Justice, which should be investigating the many foreign influence schemes of the Biden family, will instead be enhancing the climate literacy of its staff, and electrifying its 40,000+ vehicles. At the Environmental Protection Agency, these additional powers are being used to shut down manufacturing facilities in the United States," he said. 
"This is weaponization of the federal government at its worst. I am proud to lead the charge against this incredibly harmful Executive Order," Pfluger added. 
REPUBLICAN STATES PREPARING LEGAL ACTION OVER BIDEN'S POWER PLANT REGULATIONS
President Biden talks to EPA Administrator Michael Regan after signing an executive order that would create the White House Office of Environmental Justice, in the Rose Garden of the White House April 21, 2023, in Washington, D.C. The order directs federal agencies to invest in communities that are disproportionately affected by pollution and climate change. (Drew Angerer/Getty Images)
Pfluger's bill has 22 Republican co-sponsors. 
The White House did not immediately respond to a request for comment.