Right
Daily Mail
Biden signs executive order on environmental justice
https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-11999357/Biden-signs-executive-order-environmental-justice.html
President Biden on Friday signed an executive order declaring 'environmental justice' a priority at federal agencies. 
It creates a new White House Office of Environmental Justice that will be led by a Federal Chief Environmental Justice Officer, tasked with overseeing environmental justice goals across government.  
The order is meant to ensure lower income people and minorities do not suffer 'disproportionate environmental harms,' particularly those inflicted due to  a 'legacy of racial discrimination including redlining.'
In addition, the order will require agencies to notify nearby communities in the event of a release of toxic substances from a federal facility and directs agencies to address gaps in science, data and research related to environmental justice.  
President Biden on Friday signed an executive order declaring 'environmental justice' a priority at federal agencies
In addition the White House announced it is launching a new environmental justice score card that will assess federal agencies' records on environmental justice. They also announced new programs covered by 'Justice40' which says 40 percent of all resources of certain federal investments must flow to 'disadvantaged communities.' 
'For far too long, communities across our country have faced persistent environmental injustice through toxic pollution, underinvestment in infrastructure and critical services, and other disproportionate environmental harms often due to a legacy of racial discrimination including redlining,' the White House said in a press release.
'These communities with environmental justice concerns face even greater burdens due to climate change.' 
'The Executive Order recognizes this reality and that racism is a fundamental driver of environmental injustice.'
The White House has sought to contrast its environmental priorities with that of Republicans, who they paint as in the pocket of Big Oil. 
The House GOP is now pushing to have its sprawling energy package, HR 1, included in their package to raise the debt ceiling. HR 1 looks to boost energy production domestically by cutting regulations on oil, gas and mineral mining needed for green energy. 
The order is meant to ensure lower income people and minorities do not suffer 'disproportionate environmental harms,' particularly those inflicted due to a 'legacy of racial discrimination including redlining'
Friday's order comes after Thursday when Biden pledged $1 billion to help other nations around the world fight climate change, and another $500 million going to help curb deforestation in the Amazon rainforest. 
The $1 billion will come from last year's Inflation Reduction Act, but Biden will have to work with Congress to secure the $500 million.
Biden has made fighting climate change one of his top priorities.
'The United States is taking a bold action to put our energy sector on a path toward net zero emissions by no later than 2050,' he said.