Left
Washington Post
Earth’s freshwater is getting saltier, and people are to blame
https://www.washingtonpost.com/climate-environment/2023/10/31/salt-contamination-pollution-water/
Human activities are making the globe saltier, specifically in our soils, fresh water and air, according to a study released Tuesday in the journal Nature Reviews Earth & Environment.
The excess salt has already caused serious issues in freshwater supplies in recent decades. Saltier water led to brown tap water for months in Montgomery County, Md. It also played a part in creating the toxic lead-laden water in Flint, Mich.
Salt pollution isn’t some flashy threat to our existence — like, say, a meteor hitting Earth — but the issue is gravely overlooked and is a “sleeping giant,” said Sujay Kaushal, lead author of the study. He said it might be the “most boring but contemporary problem that we have.”
Most people think of salt as the white specks we put in our food or the salt in oceans, chemically known as sodium chloride (NaCl). That sodium salt can also be found in detergents, other household products and more, but there are many different salts, including calcium, magnesium and other ions used in additional products — and they’re all increasing in places where they don’t normally occur.
Over the past 50 years, salt ions have increased in streams and rivers as people have begun using and producing more salts, the study says. The team found that across the globe, about 2.5 billion acres of soil — an area about the size of the United States — have become saltier. Salt lakes are also drying up and sending saline dust into the air.
“We use water for everything from growing crops to drinking to industrial processes to heating and cooling,” said Kaushal, a geologist at the University of Maryland. “But when you have salt in the water, it affects all of those things … and it’s increasing.”
Increased salt concentrations could become “an existential threat” to our freshwater supplies, the study’s authors said.
Salt is a natural and necessary component of Earth. The compound is brought to the surface slowly over long geological time scales, through natural processes such as weathering of sedimentary rocks. When exposed at the surface, the salt can mix with water, be transported into water or go into the air. Living organisms, from plants to people, take up small portions to help regulate daily functions. Excess salt hitches a ride with water molecules, entering groundwater, soil and the oceans.
But human activities have altered this normal salt cycle in recent decades, the team found. Agriculture, mining, construction, water and road treatment, and additional industrial activities are increasing the salt in our ground, freshwater systems and air.
One source is irrigation around salty lakes, seen often in the western United States. Less water flows into the lake, and what is there often evaporates, leaving behind salt that can enter the soil and stress plants. Much like a person getting parched after eating a bag of salty chips, the plants need water. Too many chloride or sodium ions can dehydrate or poison them.
But the big source in the United States may come as a surprise: road salt, which communities use for de-icing in the winter. From 2013 to 2017, road salt made up 44 percent of the country’s entire salt consumption.
Road salt can contaminate freshwater streams, but it can also enter pipes that deliver drinking water. Many of these pipes are made of metal such as lead or copper, elements that can be harmful for the environment or people. When large quantities of road salt flood into poorly protected pipes, it can push these metals into the water, Kaushal said.
Imagine the influx of salt like a wave of people coming onto an already crowded subway car and pushing people back even farther.
That’s partly what happened years ago in Flint when officials switched the water source to the Flint River, which contained high amounts of road salt.
“They had all these lead pipes that were leading to their houses and the chloride would basically pull the lead into solution,” Kaushal said. “They didn’t add enough corrosion inhibitor, and then kids had high levels of lead in their blood.”
In recent years, some areas including Washington have switched out road salt for a more-unusual sounding antidote — beet juice. A beet juice brine, which contains less salt, helps lower the freezing point of ice, sticks to roads more effectively and is better for the environment.
Before this study, scientists didn’t really know how much humans were changing salt concentrations around the globe. But the “magnitude to which we have altered one of Earth’s natural cycles is alarming,” said ecologist Bill Hintz, who was not involved in the research.
“We are salting the Earth where it shouldn’t be salted,” said Hintz, a professor at the University of Toledo. “We are redistributing salt to places it shouldn’t be — like many of our lakes, streams, rivers and wetlands that provide us with drinking water, recreation and fisheries.”
He agreed with the study’s authors that these changes are an existential threat to freshwater supplies. Only about 3 percent of Earth’s water is fresh, and salt is increasingly spoiling that small inventory. Hintz said proactive environmental policy is needed to address these human-induced changes.
“We should all ask ourselves what would happen if we did not have access to fresh water,” Hintz said in an email. “That — perhaps rhetorical — question should be enough for us to understand the seriousness of the salinization issue.”