Left
The Guardian
Never fly again? Go vegan? It was too hard. But I still cut my emissions by 61% and it made life simpler and better
https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2023/nov/04/never-fly-again-go-vegan-it-was-too-hard-but-i-still-cut-my-emissions-by-61-and-it-made-life-simpler-and-better
When I had a baby, those future generations I’d worried about had a face. It transformed me
I’ve been worried about climate change my whole life. When I was a kid we called it the greenhouse effect and I assumed that, by the time I grew up, someone else would have fixed it. But no one did.
In my 20s I realised that, as one of the grownups, it was my job to fix it. I sought out roles in sustainability and grew increasingly despondent at leaders who denied climate change. Then I had a baby.
This transformed me. Those future generations I’d worried about now had a face. I couldn’t keep working my day job in recycling and flying halfway around a burning planet in my spare time. I wanted to take direct action.
I began my carbon diet in 2018, setting out to cut my carbon footprint and that of the average Australian by 75%. I ran 34 lifestyle experiments to see what worked. Along the way I learned carbon accounting, started a recycling company, wrote a blog, made art, looked after my daughter and became a politician. Meanwhile, Australia endured floods, fires, storms, choking smoke and a pandemic.
Environmental hope is hard but my carbon diet brought plenty. Australia’s climate wars over the last 30 years suggest we must either live in a cave or stick to our current course. That’s simply not true. Deep cuts are possible with the right information. Change has made my life better, simpler and cheaper.
Based on the federal inventory at the time, consumption-based emissions for the average Australian were 17.7 tonnes but this includes stuff like the energy used by our schools and hospitals. Specific household information is hard to come by but, according to my best (amateur) estimate, about 11.6t of this were things within direct control of individuals.
I made changes that dropped the 11.6t down to 2.6t, a cut of 78%. Along the way I learned the largest areas of my carbon footprint came from household gas and electricity, flights, food and food waste, transport, drinks, pet food and the clothes and stuff that I buy. The list was similar to that of the average Australian, although the order shifts depending on your lifestyle.
Big gains came from switching to 100% renewable electricity, using public and active transport (and later switching to an EV), flying less and swapping gas heating for electric. Going vegan cuts a tonne of emissions for the average Australian but few are prepared to do it. Instead I tried simple supermarket swaps that increased plant foods and reduced meat, fish and dairy, and cut more 600kg. Feeding my dogs pet food with no red meat was another easy win.
My own footprint started out lower (6.3t) because I already had solar panels, often rode, ate less meat and dairy than average and bought most of my clothes and other stuff second-hand. But I found hidden pockets of high consumption, and still managed to cut my emissions by 61%. I was surprised at the impact of bottled soft drinks and juice so cut them out (wine also has a significant impact but I’ve found it harder to give up). I used to eat vegan during the week and beef on Saturday but this regular weekend steak was a high-impact choice, so I’ve cut red meat down to once a month and eat chicken, duck and pork more often. Flying my family to Reno to visit a friend would have cost me nine years of veganism. I became careful about once-casual choices.
There were surprises. Food miles get more attention than they deserve because we focus on what we can see and forget about what we can’t. I found that what happens on the farm usually outweighs anything that happens afterwards, particularly for meat and dairy. Recycling is also great but there’s usually more impact in the stuff you buy than in the wrapping it came in.
Reducing your carbon footprint is much easier when you have time or money but I didn’t need both. Catching the bus, riding my bike and running efficient errands with less driving all worked. But in 2020 I became an overpaid and time-poor politician, so I swapped our petrol car for an EV (although I still ride for other reasons). For those who have neither time nor money, any change can be overwhelming.
Sign up to Down to Earth
The planet's most important stories. Get all the week's environment news - the good, the bad and the essential
after newsletter promotion
I spent a year changing my lightbulbs, taking short showers and turning down the heater to 14C during the day and off at night. Then the Australian Capital Territory government announced we had achieved 100% renewable electricity on our grid. I celebrated, then was briefly furious at how hard I had worked and how easy it was for government to solve this problem. This was my first direct experience of the limits of personal responsibility.
I’ve found compromise more workable than absolutism. Never fly again, go vegan, give up having pets? It was too hard. I eat meat twice a week and steak once a month. I take holidays at the coast and fly every few years. These choices are deliberate but hard to justify to those who’ve picked a purist path.
But the good news is compromise can be effective. My carbon diet showed relatively easy changes can make a big difference. One of the biggest lessons was that it doesn’t need to reduce your quality of life. I’m writing this during school holidays. Once I’d have bundled my family on to a plane to whiz off somewhere we’d barely remember. Instead last weekend my nine-year-old caught the perfect wave in her kayak at our local beach.
We can have a good life with less impact. We need support, leadership and the right information to do it.
Jo Clay blogged her Carbon Diet from 2018 to 2020. In 2020 she was elected the ACT member for Ginninderra