Right
The Daily Wire
Xi’s Just Not That Into You: Climate Czar John Kerry Still Simps For China
https://www.dailywire.com/news/xis-just-not-that-into-you-climate-czar-john-kerry-still-simps-for-china
The Biden administration’s climate czar John Kerry can’t help but gush about China even as the Chinese Communist Party continues to embarrass him diplomatically while suggesting they don’t care one iota about Kerry’s climate change chicanery. The guy is a total CCP simp, and his comments after an international meeting between U.S.-CCP leaders this week prove it.
First, the term “simp” refers to guys “who do way too much” for girls they have zero chance of dating. In turn, those women walk all over them and take advantage. It’s sort of new, online slang. Those caught “simping” are typically unaware of how pathetic they look. It is arguably worse than being friend-zoned. At least in the friend zone, the man is aware he is stuck.
You don’t want to be a simp, but that’s exactly what Kerry is to the CCP.
China has no interest in making any concrete commitment to climate change, let alone cutting back on carbon emissions. Nonetheless, Kerry continues the praise.
“We came to Beijing in order to unstick what has been stuck for almost a year, and that’s the in-person dialogue between the United States and China,” he beamed this week.
Kerry has been fighting for the chance to speak with the CCP face-to-face for nearly 365 days — and he’s absolutely giddy that it finally happened. He sounds like a teenager who is excited because the popular girl smiled in his direction after months of being ignored.
So how did the meeting go? Well, he came up empty-handed.
“We had very frank conversations, but we came here to break new ground, which we think is important at this stage, and it is clear that we are going to need a little more work to be able to complete that task, which we still believe, both of us, is doable,” Kerry bemoaned.
The former Massachusetts senator was appointed by President Joe Biden in 2021. Since then, he has gallivanted around the world bullying third-world countries into giving up fossil fuels, down-played his family’s private jet usage, and told countries that “money, money, money…” is what will move climate change “progress” along.
However, all of what Kerry does is moot — if you actually believe that he wants to reduce pollution — if China is not on board with his plans.
Kerry has even been willing to ignore China’s troubling human rights record in hopes of scoring a carbon emissions deal with the country.
In the past, when Kerry has been asked about such issues, he has claimed that climate change takes the higher priority.
“Yes we have issues, a number of different issues, but first and foremost, this planet must be protected,” Kerry said after being asked about the problem in September 2021.
In turn, China ramped up coal production, began ignoring Kerry’s emails, and, as noted, didn’t even have the courtesy to meet with him face-to-face. So far in 2023, China emitted nearly 12 gigatons of carbon. The next closest country is the U.S. — which has emitted roughly five gigatons of carbon based on the latest data.
So what does CCP leader President Xi Jinping have to say about all of this? Well, after Kerry met with CCP leaders, Xi effectively told Kerry to kick rocks.
Xi did say that China would work to reduce C02 emissions. He stated, “the path, method, pace and intensity to achieve this goal should and must be determined by ourselves, and will never be influenced by others.”
Ouch. 
Kerry, it’s time for a message your buddy Biden should have told you: Xi’s just not that into you, dude.
The views expressed in this piece are the author’s own and do not necessarily represent those of The Daily Wire.