Right
The Daily Wire
America Last: Biden Admin Brags About Slowing Down U.S. Oil Production
https://www.dailywire.com/news/america-last-biden-admin-brags-slowing-down-u-s-oil-production
On Friday, the Biden administration announced its latest move to weaken U.S. energy independence as the Department of Interior announced that it will propose a plan that will generate “the fewest oil and gas lease sales in history” for offshore drilling over the next five years or so.
Why? Well, to protect us from climate change, the Biden administration claims.
“The Proposed Final Program includes a maximum of three potential oil and gas lease sales – the fewest oil and gas lease sales in history – in the Gulf of Mexico Program Area scheduled in 2025, 2027, and 2029,” DOI said in a press release. “In compliance with the terms of the [Inflation Reduction Act], these three proposed lease sales are the minimum number that will enable the Interior Department to continue to expand its offshore wind leasing program through 2030.”
According to the DOI, this move is “reflecting America’s rapid and accelerating shift to clean energy.” Of course, it’s not really “reflecting” anything. It’s more evidence that the Biden administration is forcing green energy down the American people’s throats — no matter what it costs.
In reaction to the news, Senator Bill Cassidy (R-LA) blasted the president.
Biden “is caving to radical enviros, helping Russia & Venezuela, & destroying our energy security,” he posted on X.
This is the smallest offshore energy program in U.S. history. Only holding 3 lease sales over 5 years in the Gulf of Mexico isn't even bare minimum effort. @POTUS is caving to radical enviros, helping Russia & Venezuela, & destroying our energy security.
Indeed, last fall the president relaxed sanctions on Venezuela, allowing Chevron to pump oil in the socialist state. Neither he nor his Climate Czar John Kerry have done anything of substance to stop China’s carbon emissions output either.
In other words, over the last year, the Biden administration has contrived ways to shrink America’s fossil fuel production while allowing America’s enemies to run hog wild. This is par for the course.
In fact, Energy Secretary Jennifer Granholm once laughed out loud at the very idea of increasing U.S. gas production to lower costs:
Energy Secretary Jennifer Granholm laughs when asked about Biden's plans to bring gas prices down.
Secretary of Transportation Pete Buttigieg once cheekily remarked that if Americans simply bought an electric vehicle, they would not have to worry about high gas prices — as if working moms and dads have an extra $50,000 lying around to do so.
Ultimately, the Biden administration seeks a green energy utopia that will never come.
They are content with using federal power to squash “bad” industries, as they see it, and using taxpayer money to prop up “good” industries.
Companies with connections to Biden advisor John Podesta — tasked with allocating billions toward green energy — will benefit greatly. The “rapid and accelerating shift” to clean energy will reportedly cost $1 trillion. In turn, the American people will suffer. It’s all so dirty.
The views expressed in this piece are the author’s own and do not necessarily represent those of The Daily Wire.